Process Control: ps and kill
One of the most useful commands for
monitoring processes
on almost any Unix-like operating
system is ps,
which is short for process status.
Unlike the jobs command, ps lists
processes system-wide,
not only for the current terminal session.
ps is considered a standard on
Unix-like OSes
and its name is so well-recognized
that even on Windows PowerShell,
ps is a predefined command alias for the
Get-Process cmdlet,
which essentially serves the same purpose.
As a penetration tester,
one of the first things to check after
obtaining remote access to a system,
is the software currently running
on the compromised machine.
This could provide clues to help
elevate our privileges,
or collect additional information,
in order to acquire further access
into the network.
As an example, let’s start the
Leafpad text editor.
Now let’s try to find the leafpad
process ID from the command line
using the ps command.
We’ll run ps with the -ef options
where ‘e’ selects all processes and
‘f’ displays a full format listing.
Finding our Leafpad application in that
massive listing is definitely not easy,
but since we know the application
name we are looking for,
we can replace the -e switch with -C,
and specify the command name,
which is leafpad in our case.
The process search has returned
a single result
which contains Leafpad’s process ID.
Take some time to explore the ps manual
as it really is the Swiss Army knife
of process management.
Let’s say we now want to stop the Leafpad
process without interacting with the GUI.
The kill command can help us here,
as its purpose is to send a specific
signal to a process.
The kill command requires the PID of the
process we want to send the signal to.
Since we’ve already gathered Leafpad’s
process ID, we can proceed.
Because the default signal for kill is
SIGTERM (or request termination),
our application has been terminated.
We can verify this with ps
after killing Leafpad.